---
title: "Löffelsprache: A Typologically Unusual Language Game"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "University of California Berkeley"
date: 2024-04-06
location: "Berkeley, CA, USA"
---

This study aims to show that _Löffelsprache_, a German _Geheimsprache_ or secret language cannot be accurately classified using existing criteria associated with the description of language games. Speakers describe the process of creating _Löffelsprache_ forms as follows: after every vowel, add <lew>, and then repeat the vowel: _sechs_ ‘six’, becomes _selewechs_. Two language game analyses applicable to _Löffelsprache_ are affixation (Bagemihl, 1987; McCarthy, 1982; Pound, 1963), and a two-part analysis which aims to further develop the concept of affixation, namely, imposition and insertion (Botne and Davis, 2000). Both affixation and imposition rely on consistent vowel quality on either side of the language game sequence, through vowel copying or nucleus splitting respectively, while insertion requires the language game sequence to be fully specified. Forms such as _geht_ [get], [gɪ.lɪ.vet], _wie_ [vi], [vɪ.lɪ.vi], and _dir_ [diɐ], [dɪ.lɪ.viɐ], demonstrate that none of these analyses account for _Löffelsprache_, as changes in vowel quality rule out vowel copying and nucleus splitting, and the presence of a vowel on either side of <lew> disqualifies insertion. To account for _Löffelsprache_’s behavior, I propose iterative templatic transformation: iterative in that a process of adding new phonetic material occurs in relation to every nucleus of the base word, and templatic in that every _Löffelsprache_ form must match a specified output structure. Instead of inserting or affixing a sequence into every syllable, _Löffelsprache_ transforms each syllable of the base word into a three-syllable foot anapest foot, where the base nucleus appears in the stressed third syllable of the foot. Additional stipulations built into the template fully explain all _Löffelsprache_ forms.
